packages/react-three-rapier/readme.md, before:

<p align="center">
  <a href="#"><img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/pmndrs/react-three-rapier/HEAD/packages/react-three-rapier/misc/hero.svg" alt="@react-three/rapier" /></a>
</p>

<p align="center">
  <a href="https://www.npmjs.com/package/@react-three/rapier"><img src="https://img.shields.io/npm/v/@react-three/rapier?style=for-the-badge&colorA=0099DA&colorB=ffffff" /></a>
  <a href="https://discord.gg/ZZjjNvJ"><img src="https://img.shields.io/discord/740090768164651008?style=for-the-badge&colorA=0099DA&colorB=ffffff&label=discord&logo=discord&logoColor=ffffff" /></a>
</p>

<p align="center">⚠️ Under heavy development. All APIs are subject to change. ⚠️</p>

## Usage

```tsx
import { Box, Torus } from "@react-three/drei";
import { Canvas } from "@react-three/fiber";
import { Physics, RigidBody } from "@react-three/rapier";

const App = () => {
  return (
    <Canvas>
      <Suspense>
        <Physics>
          <RigidBody colliders={"hull"} restitution={2}>
            <Torus />
          </RigidBody>

          <RigidBody position={[0, -2, 0]} type="kinematicPosition">
            <Box args={[20, 0.5, 20]} />
          </RigidBody>
        </Physics>
      </Suspense>
    </Canvas>
  );
};
```

## Automatic colliders

RigidBodies generate automatic colliders by default for all meshes that it contains. You can control the default collider by setting the `colliders` prop on a `<RigidBody />`, or change it globally by setting `colliders` on `<Physics />`. Setting `colliders={false}` disables auto-generation.

Supported values:

- `"cuboid"`, creates a CuboidCollider based on the bounding box of the mesh
- `"ball"`, creates a SphereCollider based on the bounding sphere of the mesh
- `"trimesh"`, creates a TrimeshCollider based on the mesh's geometry -- note trimeshes are massless by default (https://rapier.rs/docs/user_guides/javascript/common_mistakes#rigid-body-isnt-affected-by-gravity)
- `"hull"`, creates a ConvexHullCollider based on the mesh's geometry
- `false`, disables auto-generation

Generate ConvexHull colliders for all meshes in a RigidBody by default:

```tsx
const Scene = () => (
  <Physics colliders="hull">
    <RigidBody>
      <Box />
    </RigidBody>
    <RigidBody position={[0, 10, 0]}>
      <Sphere />
    </RigidBody>
  </Physics>
);
```

Turn off automatic collider generation globally, but apply auto generation locally:

```tsx
const Scene = () => (
  <Physics colliders={false}>
    {/* Use an automatic CuboidCollider for all meshes inside this RigidBody */}
    <RigidBody colliders="cuboid">
      <Box />
    </RigidBody>

    {/* Use an automatic BallCollider for all meshes inside this RigidBody */}
    <RigidBody position={[0, 10, 0]} colliders="ball">
      <Sphere />
    </RigidBody>

    {/* Make a compound shape with two custom BallColliders */}
    <RigidBody position={[0, 10, 0]}>
      <Sphere />
      <BallCollider args={[0.5]} />
      <BallCollider args={[0.5]} position={[1, 0, 0]} />
    </RigidBody>

    {/* Make a compound shape with two custom BallColliders, an automatic BallCollider,
        Two automatic MeshColliders, based on two different shape strategies */}
    <RigidBody position={[0, 10, 0]} colliders='ball'>
      <MeshCollider type="trimesh">
        <mesh ... />
      </MeshCollider>

      <MeshCollider type="hull">
        <mesh ... />
      </MeshCollider>

      <Sphere />

      <BallCollider args={[0.5]} />
      <BallCollider args={[0.5]} position={[1, 0, 0]} />
    </RigidBody>
  </Physics>
);
```

Objects work inside other transformed objects as well. Simulation runs in world space and is transformed to the objects local space, so that things act as you'd expect.

```tsx
import { Box } from "@react-three/drei";
import { RigidBody, CuboidCollider } from "@react-three/rapier";

const Scene = () => (
  <group position={[2, 5, 0]} rotation={[0, 0.3, 2]}>
    <RigidBody>
      <Box />
      <CuboidCollider args={[0.5, 0.5, 0.5]} />
    </RigidBody>
  </group>
);
```

## Instanced Meshes

Instanced meshes can also be used and have automatic colliders generated from their mesh.

By wrapping the `InstancedMesh` in `<InstancedRigidBodies />`, each instance will be attached to an individual `RigidBody`.

> Note: Custom colliders (compound shapes) for InstancedMesh is currently not supported

```tsx
import { InstancedRigidBodies } from "@react-three/rapier";

const COUNT = 1000;

const Scene = () => {
  const instancedApi = useRef<InstancedRigidBodyApi>(null);

  useEffect(() => {
    // You can access individual instanced by their index
    instancedApi.at(40).applyImpulse({ x: 0, y: 10, z: 0 });

    // Or update all instances as if they were in an array
    instancedApi.forEach(api => {
      api.applyImpulse({ x: 0, y: 10, z: 0 });
    });
  }, []);

  // We can set the initial positions, and rotations, and scales, of
  // the instances by providing an array equal to the instance count
  const positions = Array.from({ length: COUNT }, (_, index) => [index, 0, 0]);

  const rotations = Array.from({ length: COUNT }, (_, index) => [
    Math.random(),
    Math.random(),
    Math.random()
  ]);

  const scales = Array.from({ length: COUNT }, (_, index) => [
    Math.random(),
    Math.random(),
    Math.random()
  ]);

  return (
    <InstancedRigidBodies
      ref={instancedApi}
      positions={positions}
      rotations={rotations}
      scales={scales}
      colliders="ball"
    >
      <instancedMesh args={[undefined, undefined, COUNT]}>
        <sphereBufferGeometry args={[0.2]} />
        <meshPhysicalGeometry color="blue" />

        <CuboidCollider args={[0.1, 0.2, 0.1]} />
      </instancedMesh>
    </InstancedRigidBodies>
  );
};
```

## Debug

Use the Debug component to see live representations of all colliders in a scene.

- The `color` prop sets the color of awake colliders that are affected by forces.
- The `sleepColor` prop set the color of a static (fixed, or kinematic) or sleeping collider.

> Note: Experimental. Not all shapes are supported. Unsupported shapes are always represented by cubes.

```tsx
import { Box, Sphere } from "@react-three/drei";
import { RigidBody, Debug } from "@react-three/rapier";

const Scene = () => {
  return (
    <Physics>
      <Debug color="red" sleepColor="blue" />

      <RigidBody>
        <Box />
      </RigidBody>
      <RigidBody>
        <Sphere />
      </RigidBody>
    </Physics>
  );
};
```

## Collision Events

You can subscribe to collision and state events on a RigidBody:

```tsx
const RigidBottle = () => {
  const [isAsleep, setIsAsleep] = useState(false);

return (
    <RigidBody
      colliders="hull"
      onSleep={() => setIsAsleep(true)}
      onWake={() => setIsAsleep(false)}
      onCollisionEnter={({manifold}) => {
        console.log('Collision at world position ', manifold.solverContactPoint(0))
      }}
    >
      <Sphere>
        <meshPhysicalMaterial color={isAsleep ? 'white' : 'blue'}>
      </Sphere>
    </RigidBody>
  )
}
```

You may also subscribe to collision events on individual Colliders:

```tsx
<CuboidCollider
  onCollisionEnter={payload => {
    /* ... */
  }}
  onCollisionExit={payload => {
    /* ... */
  }}
/>
```

The `payload` object for all collision callbacks contains the following properties:

- `target`  
  The other rigidbody that was involved in the collision event.
- `collider`  
  The other collider that was involved in the collision event.
- `manifold` (enter only)  
  The [contact manifold](https://rapier.rs/javascript3d/classes/TempContactManifold.html) generated by the collision event.
- `flipped` (enter only)  
  `true` if the data in the `manifold` [is flipped](https://rapier.rs/javascript3d/classes/World.html#contactPair).

### Configuring collision and solver groups

Both `<RigidBody>` as well as all collider components allow you to configure `collisionsGroups` and `solverGroups` properties that configures which groups the colliders are in, and what other groups they should interact with in potential collision and solving events (you will find more details on this in the [Rapier documentation](https://rapier.rs/docs/user_guides/javascript/colliders/#collision-groups-and-solver-groups).)

Since these are set as bitmasks and bitmasks can get a bit unwieldy to generate, this library provides a helper called `interactionGroups` that can be used to generate bitmasks from numbers and arrays of groups, where groups are identified using numbers from 0 to 15.

The first argument is the group, or an array of groups, that the collider is a member of; the second argument is the group, or an array of groups, that the collider should interact with.

Here the collider is in group 0, and interacts with colliders from groups 0, 1 and 2:

```tsx
<CapsuleCollider collisionGroups={interactionGroups(0, [0, 1, 2])} />
```

This collider is in multiple groups, but only interacts with colliders from a single group:

```tsx
<CapsuleCollider collisionGroups={interactionGroups([0, 5], 7)} />
```

When the second argument is omitted, the collider will interact with all groups:

```tsx
<CapsuleCollider collisionGroups={interactionGroups(12)} />
```

> **Note** Please remember that in Rapier, for a collision (or solving) event to occur, both colliders involved in the event must match the related interaction groups -- a one-way match will be ignored.

> **Note** By default, colliders are members of all groups, and will interact with all other groups.

## Sensors

A Collider can be set to be a sensor, which means that it will not generate any contact points, and will not be affected by forces. This is useful for detecting when a collider enters or leaves another collider, without affecting the other collider.

```tsx
<RigidBody>
  <GoalPosts />

  <CuboidCollider
    args={[5, 5, 1]}
    sensor
    onIntersectionEnter={() => console.log("Goal!")}
  />
</RigidBody>
```

## Joints

WIP

---

## Roadmap

In order, but also not necessarily:

- [x] RigidBodies, Colliders
- [x] Joints
- [x] Nested objects retain world transforms
- [x] Nested objects retain correct collider scale
- [x] Automatic colliders based on rigidbody children
- [x] Translation and rotational constraints
- [x] Collision events
- [x] Colliders outside RigidBodies
- [x] InstancedMesh support
- [x] Timestep improvements for determinism
- [x] Normalize and improve collision events (add events to single Colliders)
- [x] Add collision events to InstancedRigidBodies
- [ ] Docs
- [ ] CodeSandbox examples

Commit message:

feat(Physics):  implement`timeStep="vary"`
* Implement timestep="vary"

packages/react-three-rapier/readme.md, after:

<p align="center">
  <a href="#"><img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/pmndrs/react-three-rapier/HEAD/packages/react-three-rapier/misc/hero.svg" alt="@react-three/rapier" /></a>
</p>

<p align="center">
  <a href="https://www.npmjs.com/package/@react-three/rapier"><img src="https://img.shields.io/npm/v/@react-three/rapier?style=for-the-badge&colorA=0099DA&colorB=ffffff" /></a>
  <a href="https://discord.gg/ZZjjNvJ"><img src="https://img.shields.io/discord/740090768164651008?style=for-the-badge&colorA=0099DA&colorB=ffffff&label=discord&logo=discord&logoColor=ffffff" /></a>
</p>

<p align="center">⚠️ Under heavy development. All APIs are subject to change. ⚠️</p>

## Usage

```tsx
import { Box, Torus } from "@react-three/drei";
import { Canvas } from "@react-three/fiber";
import { Physics, RigidBody } from "@react-three/rapier";

const App = () => {
  return (
    <Canvas>
      <Suspense>
        <Physics>
          <RigidBody colliders={"hull"} restitution={2}>
            <Torus />
          </RigidBody>

          <RigidBody position={[0, -2, 0]} type="kinematicPosition">
            <Box args={[20, 0.5, 20]} />
          </RigidBody>
        </Physics>
      </Suspense>
    </Canvas>
  );
};
```

## Automatic colliders

RigidBodies generate automatic colliders by default for all meshes that it contains. You can control the default collider by setting the `colliders` prop on a `<RigidBody />`, or change it globally by setting `colliders` on `<Physics />`. Setting `colliders={false}` disables auto-generation.

Supported values:

- `"cuboid"`, creates a CuboidCollider based on the bounding box of the mesh
- `"ball"`, creates a SphereCollider based on the bounding sphere of the mesh
- `"trimesh"`, creates a TrimeshCollider based on the mesh's geometry -- note trimeshes are massless by default (https://rapier.rs/docs/user_guides/javascript/common_mistakes#rigid-body-isnt-affected-by-gravity)
- `"hull"`, creates a ConvexHullCollider based on the mesh's geometry
- `false`, disables auto-generation

Generate ConvexHull colliders for all meshes in a RigidBody by default:

```tsx
const Scene = () => (
  <Physics colliders="hull">
    <RigidBody>
      <Box />
    </RigidBody>
    <RigidBody position={[0, 10, 0]}>
      <Sphere />
    </RigidBody>
  </Physics>
);
```

Turn off automatic collider generation globally, but apply auto generation locally:

```tsx
const Scene = () => (
  <Physics colliders={false}>
    {/* Use an automatic CuboidCollider for all meshes inside this RigidBody */}
    <RigidBody colliders="cuboid">
      <Box />
    </RigidBody>

    {/* Use an automatic BallCollider for all meshes inside this RigidBody */}
    <RigidBody position={[0, 10, 0]} colliders="ball">
      <Sphere />
    </RigidBody>

    {/* Make a compound shape with two custom BallColliders */}
    <RigidBody position={[0, 10, 0]}>
      <Sphere />
      <BallCollider args={[0.5]} />
      <BallCollider args={[0.5]} position={[1, 0, 0]} />
    </RigidBody>

    {/* Make a compound shape with two custom BallColliders, an automatic BallCollider,
        Two automatic MeshColliders, based on two different shape strategies */}
    <RigidBody position={[0, 10, 0]} colliders='ball'>
      <MeshCollider type="trimesh">
        <mesh ... />
      </MeshCollider>

      <MeshCollider type="hull">
        <mesh ... />
      </MeshCollider>

      <Sphere />

      <BallCollider args={[0.5]} />
      <BallCollider args={[0.5]} position={[1, 0, 0]} />
    </RigidBody>
  </Physics>
);
```

Objects work inside other transformed objects as well. Simulation runs in world space and is transformed to the objects local space, so that things act as you'd expect.

```tsx
import { Box } from "@react-three/drei";
import { RigidBody, CuboidCollider } from "@react-three/rapier";

const Scene = () => (
  <group position={[2, 5, 0]} rotation={[0, 0.3, 2]}>
    <RigidBody>
      <Box />
      <CuboidCollider args={[0.5, 0.5, 0.5]} />
    </RigidBody>
  </group>
);
```

## Instanced Meshes

Instanced meshes can also be used and have automatic colliders generated from their mesh.

By wrapping the `InstancedMesh` in `<InstancedRigidBodies />`, each instance will be attached to an individual `RigidBody`.

> Note: Custom colliders (compound shapes) for InstancedMesh is currently not supported

```tsx
import { InstancedRigidBodies } from "@react-three/rapier";

const COUNT = 1000;

const Scene = () => {
  const instancedApi = useRef<InstancedRigidBodyApi>(null);

  useEffect(() => {
    // You can access individual instanced by their index
    instancedApi.at(40).applyImpulse({ x: 0, y: 10, z: 0 });

    // Or update all instances as if they were in an array
    instancedApi.forEach(api => {
      api.applyImpulse({ x: 0, y: 10, z: 0 });
    });
  }, []);

  // We can set the initial positions, and rotations, and scales, of
  // the instances by providing an array equal to the instance count
  const positions = Array.from({ length: COUNT }, (_, index) => [index, 0, 0]);

  const rotations = Array.from({ length: COUNT }, (_, index) => [
    Math.random(),
    Math.random(),
    Math.random()
  ]);

  const scales = Array.from({ length: COUNT }, (_, index) => [
    Math.random(),
    Math.random(),
    Math.random()
  ]);

  return (
    <InstancedRigidBodies
      ref={instancedApi}
      positions={positions}
      rotations={rotations}
      scales={scales}
      colliders="ball"
    >
      <instancedMesh args={[undefined, undefined, COUNT]}>
        <sphereBufferGeometry args={[0.2]} />
        <meshPhysicalGeometry color="blue" />

        <CuboidCollider args={[0.1, 0.2, 0.1]} />
      </instancedMesh>
    </InstancedRigidBodies>
  );
};
```

## Debug

Use the Debug component to see live representations of all colliders in a scene.

- The `color` prop sets the color of awake colliders that are affected by forces.
- The `sleepColor` prop set the color of a static (fixed, or kinematic) or sleeping collider.

> Note: Experimental. Not all shapes are supported. Unsupported shapes are always represented by cubes.

```tsx
import { Box, Sphere } from "@react-three/drei";
import { RigidBody, Debug } from "@react-three/rapier";

const Scene = () => {
  return (
    <Physics>
      <Debug color="red" sleepColor="blue" />

      <RigidBody>
        <Box />
      </RigidBody>
      <RigidBody>
        <Sphere />
      </RigidBody>
    </Physics>
  );
};
```

## Collision Events

You can subscribe to collision and state events on a RigidBody:

```tsx
const RigidBottle = () => {
  const [isAsleep, setIsAsleep] = useState(false);

return (
    <RigidBody
      colliders="hull"
      onSleep={() => setIsAsleep(true)}
      onWake={() => setIsAsleep(false)}
      onCollisionEnter={({manifold}) => {
        console.log('Collision at world position ', manifold.solverContactPoint(0))
      }}
    >
      <Sphere>
        <meshPhysicalMaterial color={isAsleep ? 'white' : 'blue'}>
      </Sphere>
    </RigidBody>
  )
}
```

You may also subscribe to collision events on individual Colliders:

```tsx
<CuboidCollider
  onCollisionEnter={payload => {
    /* ... */
  }}
  onCollisionExit={payload => {
    /* ... */
  }}
/>
```

The `payload` object for all collision callbacks contains the following properties:

- `target`  
  The other rigidbody that was involved in the collision event.
- `collider`  
  The other collider that was involved in the collision event.
- `manifold` (enter only)  
  The [contact manifold](https://rapier.rs/javascript3d/classes/TempContactManifold.html) generated by the collision event.
- `flipped` (enter only)  
  `true` if the data in the `manifold` [is flipped](https://rapier.rs/javascript3d/classes/World.html#contactPair).

### Configuring collision and solver groups

Both `<RigidBody>` as well as all collider components allow you to configure `collisionsGroups` and `solverGroups` properties that configures which groups the colliders are in, and what other groups they should interact with in potential collision and solving events (you will find more details on this in the [Rapier documentation](https://rapier.rs/docs/user_guides/javascript/colliders/#collision-groups-and-solver-groups).)

Since these are set as bitmasks and bitmasks can get a bit unwieldy to generate, this library provides a helper called `interactionGroups` that can be used to generate bitmasks from numbers and arrays of groups, where groups are identified using numbers from 0 to 15.

The first argument is the group, or an array of groups, that the collider is a member of; the second argument is the group, or an array of groups, that the collider should interact with.

Here the collider is in group 0, and interacts with colliders from groups 0, 1 and 2:

```tsx
<CapsuleCollider collisionGroups={interactionGroups(0, [0, 1, 2])} />
```

This collider is in multiple groups, but only interacts with colliders from a single group:

```tsx
<CapsuleCollider collisionGroups={interactionGroups([0, 5], 7)} />
```

When the second argument is omitted, the collider will interact with all groups:

```tsx
<CapsuleCollider collisionGroups={interactionGroups(12)} />
```

> **Note** Please remember that in Rapier, for a collision (or solving) event to occur, both colliders involved in the event must match the related interaction groups -- a one-way match will be ignored.

> **Note** By default, colliders are members of all groups, and will interact with all other groups.

## Sensors

A Collider can be set to be a sensor, which means that it will not generate any contact points, and will not be affected by forces. This is useful for detecting when a collider enters or leaves another collider, without affecting the other collider.

```tsx
<RigidBody>
  <GoalPosts />

  <CuboidCollider
    args={[5, 5, 1]}
    sensor
    onIntersectionEnter={() => console.log("Goal!")}
  />
</RigidBody>
```

## Joints

WIP

## Configuring Time Step Size

By default, `<Physics>` will simulate the physics world at a fixed rate of 60 frames per second. This can be changed by setting the `timeStep` prop on `<Physics>`:

```tsx
<Physics timeStep={1 / 30}>{/* ... */}</Physics>
```

The `timeStep` prop may also be set to `"vary"`, which will cause the simulation's time step to adjust to every frame's frame delta:

```tsx
<Physics timeStep="vary">{/* ... */}</Physics>
```

> **Note** This is useful for games that run at variable frame rates, but may cause instability in the simulation. It also prevents the physics simulation from being fully deterministic. Please use with care!

---

## Roadmap

In order, but also not necessarily:

- [x] RigidBodies, Colliders
- [x] Joints
- [x] Nested objects retain world transforms
- [x] Nested objects retain correct collider scale
- [x] Automatic colliders based on rigidbody children
- [x] Translation and rotational constraints
- [x] Collision events
- [x] Colliders outside RigidBodies
- [x] InstancedMesh support
- [x] Timestep improvements for determinism
- [x] Normalize and improve collision events (add events to single Colliders)
- [x] Add collision events to InstancedRigidBodies
- [ ] Docs
- [ ] CodeSandbox examples
